---
layout: post
title: "The Autobiography of Malcolm X"
description: ""
categories: articles
tags: [reviews]
---

The world Malcolm X describes in the 1960s is not too different from the world today. As a result, I am tempted to see most of his opinions on race in America as still worth consideration. Here are two of his opinions that stuck with me:

1. There is no "black man's problem" or "civil rights" problem. The treatment of blacks in America is a universal, humanitarian issue; it should be recognized and reframed as such.

2. Black communities should strive to pull themselves up by their own bootstraps, however difficult it may be.

Still, we have made some progress since Malcolm X's time, and I'm tempted to attribute much of this progress to him directly. From what I can tell from this book, Americans in the 1950s (of any color) didn't seem to realize that a) Jesus was black, b) the first humans were black, and that c) slavery was atrocious. As Malcolm X and the Nation of Islam put it, because African-Americans had their family histories erased when they were brought to America, their descendents who today find themselves at the bottom of the totem pole may have indeed descended from the kings and queens of Africa. Prior to reading this book I hadn't realized that the "X" of "Malcolm X" is literally a variable standing in for his unknown heritage.

Despite its eventual seriousness, the first half of _The Autobiography of Malcolm X_ is surprisingly fun to read. And though Malcolm X's description of his life in the streets of Boston and Harlem is both fun and exciting, his transformation upon entering prison is nearly unbelievable. That he could transform from an illiterate street shark into intellectual activist all while behind bars is a testament, I think, not only to his incredible mind but also to his luck to have been transferred to an "experimental" (i.e., actually reforming?) prison with such a great library. It is sad to think that prison was perhaps his first access to books of that quality.

The epilogue written by Alex Haley is actually one of the more interesting parts of this book. In fact, Alex Haley's role in this story has one major advantage over a traditional (i.e., not ghostwritten) autobiography: Following his trip to Mecca, Malcolm X had a major philosophical turning point, near the end of his life. Because Alex Haley had interviewed Malcolm both before and after this period, Chapter 14 of the book is told by a pre-turning point Malcolm X, as opposed to a Malcolm recalling past events retrospectively.

All in all, _The Autobiography of Malcolm X_ has to be one of the few books worthy of the quotes printed on its cover. From Spike Lee: "The most important book I'll ever read. It changed the way I thought, it changed the way I acted..." I was so engrossed by Malcolm X's story that I essentially narrated each chapter of it to Jess as I read it. And I am very much looking forward to finally watching Spike Lee's film version of the story.
