---
layout: post
title: Ta-Nehisi Coates's "Between the World and Me"
description: ""
categories: articles
tags: [books]
---

In his autobiography, Malcolm X recounts a time when a white college woman found him in a cafe following a speech he'd given at the local university. "What can I do?" she asked him. His only reply: "Nothing." Later, he would regret this response, and his corrected advice (to paraphrase) was that whites should form their _own_ groups, to build awareness of racial injustice in their own communities. This advice has seemed especially relevant in the last few days, scrolling through Facebook and seeing the deluge of posts by friends in response to the murders of Alton Sterling and Philando Castile. And yet, clearly, it's not enough to just talk about it amongst ourselves. The question remains: What can we do?

And so today I thought of Ta-Nahesi Coates, and this book of his that I had finished reading only a week ago, and its many dog-eared pages that I had yet to review. Ta-Nehisi Coates's _Between the World and Me_ is not uplifting. And it's certainly not as entertaining or exciting as _The Autobiography of Malcolm X_, which <a href="{{ site.url }}/malcolm-x">I read</a> just prior to this. Instead, _Between the World and Me_ is solemn, unsettling, and for that reason much more realistic.

From Ta-Nahesi Coates, written before these most recent murders but relevant all the same:

> "Think of all the embraces, all the private jokes, customs, greetings, names, dreams, all the shared knowledge and capacity of a black family injected into that vessel of flesh and bone. And think how that vessel was taken, shattered on the concrete..."

What sticks out to me now, having set down this book so rich in emotion and wisdom, is how privileged I am to have read at my own leisure about the dangers of being a black man in America, to now watch videos of them being casually murdered, all without having to fear that I might myself become a victim.

Ta-Nahesi Coates knows this. He writes about me in his book: I am what he calls a Dreamer. And so where Malcolm X believed that black communities should lift themselves up by their own bootstraps, Ta-Nahesi Coates sees things a little differently:

> "The terrible truth is that we cannot will ourselves to an escape on our own. Perhaps that was, is, the hope of the movement: to awaken the Dreamers, to rouse them to the facts of what their need to be white...has done to the world."

By this "need" to be white he refers to the fact that race is not about the color of your skin on the day you're born--it's about everything that color means as your days go on. And if you find yourself with a "good" color you may naturally forget that the reason others are not as lucky as you is only because their color was once called "bad". With that forgetting we create a divide, and that's what's between the world and Ta-Nahesi Coates.

> "And I saw that what divided me from the world was not anything intrinsic to us but the actual injury done by people intent on naming us, intent on believing that what they have named us matters more than anything we could ever actually do."

And so we, the Dreamers, may go to sleep, while those with black bodies must stay vigilant. The challenge, according to Ta-Nahesi Coates, is to get the Dreamers to face reality:

> "To acknowledge [the long war against the black body] means turning away from the brightly rendered version of your country as it has always declared itself and turning toward something murkier and unknown."

A black man being murdered without cause is nothing new. We're merely having our attention called to it more often. But having our attention called to it is not the same thing as waking up from the Dream. Here's Ta-Nahesi Coates describing America's reaction to the murder of Prince Jones, a 25 year old black man, in 2000:

> "When it came to her son, Dr. Jones's country did what it does best--it forgot him. The forgetting is habit, is yet another necessary component of the Dream...They have forgotten, because to remember would tumble them out of the beautiful Dream and force them to live down here with us, down in the world. I am convinced that the Dreamers, at least the Dreamers of today, would rather live white than live free...To awaken them is to reveal that they are an empire of humans...built on the destruction of the body."

I, and many others, may now feel awakened. The unfortunate thing is that many of us will go back to sleep. But doing so is not without (moral) consequence. From the Russian writer Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn:

> "To do evil a human being must first of all believe that what he's doing is good, or else that it's a well-considered act in conformity with natural law."

We return to the Dream because we can--but others are not so lucky. To ignore this reality is to perpetrate evil.

So what can white people do? Don't go back to dreamland.
