---
layout: post
title: "The sound of chopping"
description: ""
categories: articles

---

Whenever I'm in the bathroom I can hear sounds from the apartment below us coming up through the vents. Sometimes I hear voices, and often along with those voices I hear something like a chopping sound. Knowing that the kitchen of the downstairs apartment is basically right below me, I've just assumed that what I'm hearing is the chopping of a knife on a cutting board--someone below me making food while talking to their roommate.

Other times, I hear no voice and just the chopping sound. These times, I get an image of my housemate making a meal for herself alone, chopping up an onion or carrots as part of an odd meal.

The chopping noise happens at all hours of the day, and every time I hear it, without consciously deciding to, I suddenly get an image of my housemate preparing a meal, and if there are no voices I imagine her alone, making that meal.

But how amazing is that? That I am able (not just "I am able", but even "I unconsciously") to deduce from such a simple, periodic impulse of sound that this is the sound of a knife chopping things.

The sound itself, after all, suggests nothing of the idea of "knife", nor of a cutting board, nor of a roommate below me. Instead, these things are all intimately associated with one another thanks to my pre-existing knowledge of where I am (above a kitchen), what people tend to do (eat), and so on.

But this sound itself is not even a pure sound, but instead a sound filtered through the tinny echoes of a heating vent whose sonic properties I am almost totally ignorant of. Somehow, though, it seems my brain thinks itself familiar enough with these sonic properties that it can decide this is the sound of a knife chopping.

To conclude: I hear a periodic noise and interpret that as the sound of a knife chopping, which leads me to believe someone is preparing a meal, which leads me finally to the mental image of my roommate below, hungry, making herself lunch or a dinner or a late night snack.

But after a while, I began to notice that this chopping sound was happening at all hours of the day, and a little too often. What are the odds, after all, that every time I was in the bathroom someone was also chopping up vegetables? I decided that the sound was not the sound of chopping but instead just an inanimate knocking from an unknown source. And suddenly, the knife and the cutting board and the mental image of my roommate below simply vanished. I stopped thinking about the sound altogether. The sound, no longer offering any promise of me being able to infer something about the world around me. A sound which was now, simply, a noise.

